The path space described here provides a very simple demonstration of the
topological invariance of the Stiefel-Whitney classes for a differentiable manifold
M. This invariance has been proved by other means by R. Thom.'
Actually, Thom proves a more general result, which implies the topological
invariance of these classes. He shows that the fiber homotopy type of the tangent
bundle of M depends only on the topological structure of M. Because the Stiefel-
Whitney classes are dependent only on the fiber homotopy type of the tangent
bundle, their topological invariance follows.
The path space we introduce is regarded as a fiber space2 over M, and it turns out
to have the same fiber homotopy type as the tangent bundle. Since the definition of
the path space is purely topological, the general result of Thom follows immedi-
ately. Also, one sees directly that the Stiefel-Whitney classes have an analogue for
manifolds without differentiability structure.
jection mapping to M by mapping each path  starting point, x(O).
We can regard M as provided with a smooth Riemannian metric. It is con-
venient2 to assume that this metric is such that the geodesic distance between any
pair of conjugate points is always more than one. Then, if two points are not more
than one unit apart, there is a unique shortest geodesic segment joining them, and
this segment varies continuously with the points.
The tangent bundle can now be regarded as formed by the geodesic paths of
length 1, parametrized by arc length. This makes it a subspace of our fiber space
of paths. What we prove is that the tangent bundle (thus represented) is a fiber
deformation retract of the path space.
The retraction is easy to construct. The essential point is to find a parameter
value t* for each path which varies continuously with the path and has the property
that for 0 < t < t* the points x(t) and x(O) are less than one unit of distance apart.
Then a unique shortest geodesic runs from x(O) to x(t).
To define 1*, let d(t) be the distance from x(t) to x(O). 
Using t*, the deformation of the paths into geodesics of unit length can be de-
fined as a three-stage process. First, contract the path along itself until it becomes
the subpath ending at the parameter value t*. We may now deform it into the
geodesic segment -from x(O) to x(t*), with the use of the geodesic segments from
x(O) to x(t), 0 < I < t*. Finally, the geodesic segment from x(O) to x(t*) is gradually
extended until it has unit length.
This note outlines the proofs of theorems on the continuity of solutions of linear
parabolic and elliptic partial differential equations. These a priori continuity
theorems are important for their applications to nonlinear equations. Our original
motivation was the existence problems for fluid flow, especially the general com-
pressible viscous flow, and the turbulence problem. We were led to the problem
solved here by a process of reduction, isolating what seemed the essential difficulty
facing an attack on the general nonlinear equations.
Such equations characterize diffusion or heat conduction.
We attack via fundamental solutions, which are conveniently unified in a single
characterizing function S(xUZ). S is defined and positive whenever t > 7.' For
fixed x, I S satisfies equation (1) and has unit weight: fS dx = 1, where dx con-
ventionally stands for the volume element in the Euclidean space. For fixed x, t
S is similarly a fundamental solution of the adjoint equation
Our argument has three main stages, in which different inequalities are estab-
lished. The major result of the first stage is important in itself and is used in all
later stages. It controls the rate of "spreading out" of a fundamental solution and
seems the key to the whole problem. We begin by considering a fundamental
solution T = S(xtOO) with singularity at the origin. 
In equation (25) the second integral can also be written as duldxr, the conversion of
the measure into a function, and xi can be any point in space. Using equation (25)
with relation (10), we control the portion of the weight of the total measure in the
boundary part dp in terms of the size of \t2,- t1 compared with the distance
d(x2) from x2 to B. Then we use equation (25) again to establish the approximation
of do, to S(x2t2xltl) dx1. This reduces the problem of estimating the continuity of T'
at time t2 to the free-space problem where relation (2) applies. The elliptic bound-
ary-value problem corresponds to the parabolic one where everything is independent
of time and a steady state obtains. The best continuity control is obtained by
selecting t2 - t1 in proper relation to
 - x2'|, d(x2) and d(x2'), x2 and X2' being
two points in R. Proceeding crudely, we obtain relation (3).
Previously, relation (3) was known only up to two dimensions and was obtained
by somewhat special methods. This limited the study of nonlinear elliptic prob-
lems to one and two dimensions. Relation (2) was, at most, known only in one
space dimension. The key inequality (10) contains more strength than we have
used here to derive relations (2) and (3).
In all our discussion we have ignored smoothness questions, because, in obtaining
the results we obtain, the essential thing is that no quantitative smoothness assump-
tioris are used, while any qualitative smoothness, such as C', assumed for the coef-
ficients of equation (1) is quite harmless.
The author wants to thank the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Institute for
Advanced Study (Princeton), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, New York
University, and the individuals who helped in various ways.
