Taco... grande. Taco... grande.

Yo quiero chimichangas y chile colorado.
Yo tengo el dinero para un steak picado.
Las flautas y tamales, siempre muy bueno.
Y el chile relleno.

You see, I just gotta have a tostada, carne asada.
That's right, I want the whole enchilada.
My only addiction has to do with a flour tortilla.
I need a quesadilla.

I love to stuff my face with tacos al carbón.
With my friends, or when I'm all alone.
Yo tengo mucho hambre y ahora lo quiero.
Un burrito ranchero.

So give me something spicy and hot, now.
Break out the menu, what you got, now?
Oh, would you tell the waiter I'd like to have sour cream on the side.
You better make sure the beans are refried.

Taco... grande. Taco... grande.

Well, there's not a taco big enough for a man like me.
That's why I order two or three.
Let me give you a tip, just try a nacho chip.
It's really good with bean dip.

I eat uno, dos, tres, quarto burritos.
Pretty soon I can't fit in my Speedos.
Well, I hope they feed us lots of chicken fajitas.
And a pitcher of margaritas.

Well, the combination plates all come with beans and rice.
The taquitos here are very nice.
Now I'm down on my knees, we need some extra tomatoes and cheese.
And could you make that separate checks, please?

Taco... grande. Taco... grande.

"Buenos noches, senor.
bienvenido a el burritos casa de salsa.
tenemos muchos platos muy sabrosos si puedo
recomendar el ardiente pollo al infierno muy delicioso.
sus ojos se quemaran, su estomago estara en fuego,
se quedaran en el baño por una semana,
entiendes lo que digo gringo estupido tonto?
Well, the food is coming, I can hardly wait
Now watch your fingers, careful hot plate!
What you think you're doing with my chile con queso?
Well, if you want some, just say so.

Oh boy, pico de gallo.
They sure don't make it like this in Ohio.
No gracias, yo quiero jalepeños, nada más.
You can toss away the hot sauce.

Donde estan los nachos?
You better get me a bowl of guacamole.
Y Usted, Eugene?
Don't you like pinto beans?

You want some more cinnamon crispas?
If you don't, hasta la vista.
Just take the rest home in a doggie bag if you wanna.
You can finish it mañana.
.
Well, it's been a pleasure, I can't eat no more.
Señor, la cuenta, por favor.
If you ain't tried real Mexican cooking, well, you oughta.
Just don't drink the water.
